Virtualization and File System
Management
Module 6
Dr. Naveenkumar J
Associate Professor,
PRP- 217 - 4
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System - Definition
❑ A file system is a structure and set of rules that
dictates how data is stored, organized, and managed on
storage devices like hard drives, SSDs, and USB drives.
❑ Without a file system, the OS would see a storage
device as a single, undifferentiated block of data,
making it impossible to distinguish between different
files.
02-11-2025 2
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System - Definition
❑A file system acts as an index for all the data on a
storage device, allowing users and applications to
create, read, update, and delete files in an organized
manner.
02-11-2025 3
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System - Definition
❑Files
❑A file is a named collection of related information, such
as a document, program, or image, recorded on storage.
File systems define conventions for naming files,
including length and character limitations
❑Directories
❑Also known as folders, directories are used to group files
and other directories. This creates a hierarchical
structure, with the "root" directory at the top.
02-11-2025 4
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System - Definition
❑Partitions
❑ Before a file system can be used, a storage device is
typically divided into one or more partitions.
❑ Each partition is a distinct region of storage that the
OS manages separately, and each can be formatted
with a different file system.
❑ This separation can improve performance, security,
and data integrity.
02-11-2025 5
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System - Definition
❑ Metadata
❑Along with the actual data in a file, the file system
stores metadata.
❑This includes information such as the file's name,
size, creation date, access permissions, and its
location within the directory structure.
02-11-2025 6
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System Interface
❑ The file system interface defines how the operating
system presents files and directories to the user and
how applications can interact with them.
❑ It abstracts the physical properties of storage devices
into a logical storage unit
02-11-2025 7
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System – Access Methods
❑ Access methods determine how the information within a file can be accessed and read.
❑ Sequential Access
❑ This is the most common method.
❑ Information in the file is processed in order, one record after another.
❑ A read operation advances a file pointer to the next position, and a write operation appends to
the end of the file or overwrites subsequent data.
❑A sequential access file emulates magnetic tape
operation, and generally supports a few operations:
❑Readnext – read a record and advance the tape to
the next position.
❑writenext-write a record and advance the tape to
the next position.
❑Rewind
❑Skip n records – May or may not be supported. N
may be limited to positive numbers or may be
limited to +/-1.
02-11-2025 8
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System – Access Methods
❑ Direct Access Also known as relative access,
❑ This method allows a program to read or write information from a file in any order, without
reading from the beginning.
❑ The file is viewed as a numbered sequence of blocks or records. This is useful for database
applications where data needs to be accessed rapidly and in a non-linear fashion.
❑ Jump to any record and read that record. Operations supported
include:
❑ read n - read record number n. ( Note an argument is now
required. )
❑ write n - write record number n. ( Note an argument is now
required. )
❑ jump to record n - could be 0 or the end of file.
❑ Query current record - used to return back to this record
later.
❑ Sequential access can be easily emulated using direct access.
The inverse is complicated and inefficient.
02-11-2025 9
Module 6 - Virtualization
File System – Access Methods
❑Other Methods
❑ More complex access methods can be built on top of direct access.
❑ One common approach is to create an index for the file.
❑ The index, like an index in a book, contains pointers to various blocks in the file, allowing data
to be found quickly without searching the entire file
02-11-2025 10